---
til-tags: ["tools"]
title: "Asdf is a version manager promising to replace all the version managers"
description: "No more installing all of nvm/rbenv/pyenv/whatever"
date: 2020-11-09
---

[Asdf](https://asdf-vm.com/) is a tool for managing versions. It lets you manage versions for a bunch of different things, with just one version manager. (Instead of installing nvm and rbenv and pyenv and and and)

## It has comments
Asdf supports comments - lines starting with `#` are comments. At first this wasn’t working for me - which made me realized the version that had been installed by the [setup script I ran on my new work computer](https://github.com/thoughtbot/laptop) was old. I ran `asdf update` and then I could comment.

## It supports project-level config
[Docs on configuration](https://asdf-vm.com/#/core-configuration) suggest that an `.asdfrc` file must exist at `$HOME/.asdfrc` if you want to have configuration. But if you’re working on a project with others and want to change a setting (perhaps to set `legacy_version_file=yes`, so you can keep the source of truth for the ruby version in `.ruby-version`), you can also create a file called `.asdfrc` in the root of your project. And when you run `asdf install` there, those config options will be respected. 

This isn’t working perfectly  - I set the postgres version in `myproject/.asdrfc` and asdf gave me the right version, but when I ran `bundle install` in the same directory (using a legacy version of ruby & rails many other things probably; this could be fixed in current version), the `pg` gem compilation wasn’t finding the right version of postgres, and I had to place the version in the `$HOME/.asdfrc` directory anyways. There's probably another/better workaround, but it works for me for now. Even though it's currently a bit hacky, I like that the correct version for a given project can be listed right there in the project repository for others to read from. 
